Another summer, another Summer Olympics. It's been a wild few weeks in London, from our initial fawning over the Queen's corgis to Sunday night's pop star-studded journey through the British arts. In between, there were enough highlights and talking reels to tide us over until Rio.


Nike's next windbreaker: the American flag.
ASSOCIATED PRESS
We'll remember the way Usain Bolt and Michael Phelps cemented their legendary statuses with a string of record-breaking, competition-negating performances. We'll remember the fierce U.S. women's gymnastics team, filled with enough potential stars to make every Hollywood agent's head spin. We'll remember our amazingly accurate medal projections. We'll remember Hope Solo and Abby Wambach breaking ground on a come-from-behind women's soccer gold medal, the first female Saudi competitors and improbably enough, a badminton scandal. That's without mentioning Andy Murray, Oscar Pistorious, Bryshon Nellum, Shin A-lam and many, many more memorable faces who flooded our television screens. After we've remembered all that, we can remember it all over again.

"No one expected London to top what was the largess of Beijing and yet, with grace and panache fully fitting of the British people, the 2012 Games delivered. And then some," Bryan Fischer writes for CBS Sports. "Faster, higher, stronger, the past two weeks surely lived up to the Olympic motto. It didn't try and top anything, rather it lived in the present and let the athletic achievements and special moments flow naturally from one day to the next. Over 16 days the world watched and each night went to sleep amazed."

The final Olympic day wasn't without a final thrilling event. As expected, the U.S. men's basketball team played in the final for its second straight gold medal. The competition, though, was much stiffer than expected, as Spain came shockingly close to pulling off the upset. Despite some early foul trouble, the Spaniards hung within a few points for most of the game, in no small thanks to the way Pau Gasol was able to take advantage of an undersized American frontcourt. But as will happen when the NBA's six top scorers get playing time, there were just too many players available to get hot. Kevin Durant, Chris Paul, Kobe Bryant and LeBron James took turns bolstering the slim lead, and by the end, the U.S. was firmly in front for a 107-100 victory. "[The Spaniards] believed in miracles, which enabled them to withstand a torrid assault of seven U.S. threes in the opening period, but the American stars believed in themselves more," writes Sports Illustrated's Ian Thomsen. "Their depth and togetherness and peaking talents overwhelmed the technical advantages of length and institutional teamwork that the Spaniards had developed over their decade of playing together. Really, it came down to this: From the beginning, the Spaniards imagined they could win, but the Americans knew they would win in the end."

Plenty of questions await the program. Coach Mike Krzyzewski is expected to retire after compiling a 62-1 international record. There's a debate over whether the pro-player format will be scrapped in favor of an under-23 team -- the preferred choice of the NBA ownership that would like to see some financial return rather than risk. (First, they'll have to pitch it to the players.) It'll be enough to talk about for the next four years, as the Olympic cycle repeats.

Hyperbolic anticipation has stymied a great many careers in sports, if not outright ended them. But after a performance like Rory McIlroy's all-out domination of the PGA Championship, it's sort of impossible to apply the brakes. A year after winning his first major, the 23-year-old burst through with a 13-under-par and an eight-stroke margin of victory -- the latter of which set a new record. Which means no one else was remotely close, and the gulf of distance already has columnists salivating over the golf legends McIlroy might resemble at this early stage of his career. We'll wait a little longer before calling him the Next Anything and simply appreciate the literally unparalleled performance that will go a long way toward inaugurating McIlroy as golf's biggest threat.

"No, we're looking at the best golfer in the world. McIlroy, who moved to the top spot in the Official World Golf Ranking with his win, went from king-in-waiting to the new king of golf on Sunday," writes Yahoo's Jonathan Wall. "It would be a huge deal, but the thing is, this is what we always expected from him."

Bemoaning the state of print journalism is not typical territory for the Fix, but it's really sort of impossible to imagine a modern climate in which a summer intern could be given the opportunities to eventually become a newspaper's premier reporter for 44 long years. (Namely because newspapers might not be around in 44 years.) But it did happen, which is what make Bob Ryan's career longevity so remarkable. For longer than both your Fixers have been alive, Ryan was a staple in the Boston Globe as the definitive Celtics writer, burnishing his resume with the types of book deals and awards that get journalism students drooling. After announcing his retirement earlier this year, Ryan wrote a farewell letter in the Globe on Sunday explaining his reasons for leaving. It's a career that won't likely be replicated.

"So why now? It's time; that's all. I've covered the events I wanted to cover. I reached a goal with the Bruins' Stanley Cup run in 2011 to have covered championships in all four primary pro sports. I've covered 29 Final Fours. London has been my 11th Olympics. I even did a dog show. I am fulfilled," he writes. "But there is something else. I occasionally come across some things I wrote years ago, and I say to myself, "I did that?" And I know in my heart I really couldn't match that effort today. That's all a writer needs to know."

Found a good column from the world of sports? Don't keep it to yourself — write to us at dailyfixlinks@gmail.com and we'll consider your find for inclusion in the Daily Fix. You can email Jeremy at jeremypaulgordon@gmail.com
