Republican Donald Trump, a political novice who ran a nationalist campaign calling for restricting immigration and international trade, scored a stunning win to become the 45th president of the United States, defeating Democrat Hillary Clinton in one of the biggest upsets in U.S. political history.

Mr. Trump rolled to victory in a series of states that put him over the 270 electoral-vote threshold, ending a cliffhanger night of vote counting that capped the bitter, months long presidential contest.

Mr. Trump was declared winner in Wisconsin, one of many rust belt states that rallied behind him, he was declared the winner by the Associated Press. Mrs. Clinton called Mr. Trump to concede, he said at his victory rally.

The polls and political pundits gave Mr. Trump little chance of winning. But he gathered victories in state after state, running up extraordinary vote totals in rural areas and working-class counties, while big-city turnout fell short, including black voters that Democrat Hillary Clinton had counted on to carry her.

It was a stunning end to an election that provided a historic choice: selecting the first female president in U.S. history, taking the baton of leadership from the nation’s first black president, or electing a political novice on the promise of radical change.

The long night of vote counting was an appropriate end to a campaign that had turned into one of the most unpredictable in modern politics. Heading into Election Day, Mrs. Clinton had enough states locked up, according to polls, that Mr. Trump’s narrow path required him to win just about every battleground state and pick up at least one Democratic-leaning state.

It was a stunning end to an election that provided a historic choice: selecting the first female president in U.S. history, taking the baton of leadership from the nation’s first black president, or electing a political novice on the promise of radical change.

The long night of vote counting was an appropriate end to a campaign that had turned into one of the most unpredictable in modern politics. Heading into Election Day, Mrs. Clinton had enough states locked up, according to polls, that Mr. Trump’s narrow path required him to win just about every battleground state and pick up at least one Democratic-leaning state.

After such a long and closely fought battle, the next president faces a deeply divided nation. Both candidates were viewed negatively by a majority of voters, polls showed. To many, the presidential election was seen as a choice between the lesser of two evils.

Craig Joerres, 50 years old, of Waukesha, Wis., said he needed a glass of whiskey before voting Tuesday. “It has been such a stressful election season,” he said. “Both parties had so much hate.” He said he voted for Mr. Trump to shake up Washington.

Liliana Sanchez, age 29, said she voted for Mrs. Clinton, in part, because she was repelled by Mr. Trump.

“I have a daughter who has a disability. I didn’t like the way he talked about people who are disabled,” the Colorado woman said, referring to a campaign appearance that showed Mr. Trump seemingly mock a disabled reporter. “I’m also, of course, a woman,” she added, “I don’t like the way he expressed himself about women.”

About 130 million Americans were expected to cast ballots. At stake was not only the presidency, but a vacancy on the Supreme Court, as well as control of the Senate.

At least 47 million people cast ballots in early voting across such states as Arizona, Florida and Nevada, setting records. In Florida, more than six million people voted early—a 35% increase from 2012. In North Carolina, about half of all registered voters cast ballots early, totaling more than 3 million.

Through mid-October, the two candidates and their allies spent about $1.4 billion on campaign operations and advertising to persuade American voters.

Both Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Trump voted Tuesday morning in their home state of New York, following a frantic spate of 11th hour campaigning in battleground states that spanned New Hampshire, Nevada, Florida and Michigan.

When Mrs. Clinton voted in Chappaqua, N.Y., she spoke of her chance to make history and the enormity of the task should she win.

“I know how much responsibility goes with this and so many people are counting on the outcome of this election, what it means for our country and I will do the very best I can if I’m fortunate enough to win today,” she told reporters.

Mr. Trump projected confidence as he arrived to cast his vote at a public school in New York City. “I’m very excited,” he said. “It’s a great opportunity. There is tremendous enthusiasm from everybody.”

The presidential campaign presented voters with a contrast of visions—both about the state of the nation and where it should head next.

Mr. Trump spoke of a country in decline, burdened by illegal immigration, poor trade deals and terrorist threats. He labeled Mrs. Clinton as “crooked.” He called for tax cuts and promised to repeal President Barack Obama’s health-care law.

The New York businessman said he would build a wall along the U.S.-Mexico border and send those living in the U.S. without permission back to their home countries.

Preliminary exit polls on Tuesday showed that voters, by a nearly three-to-one margin, preferred offering illegal immigrants a path to legal status rather than conducting mass deportations; a solid majority opposed building the wall.

Mrs. Clinton, in contrast, embraced the health care law, along with economic improvements and social changes of the past eight years. After criticizing Mr. Trump for weeks, she sought to end the campaign on an optimistic note, asking voters to choose a “hopeful, inclusive, big-hearted America.”

Faced with the chance to elect the first woman to the White House, many voters paid homage Tuesday to those who knocked down barriers in the fight for women’s suffrage in the early 1900s.

Hundreds of Clinton supporters made a pilgrimage to the gravesite of Susan B. Anthony, a prominent activist in the fight for women’s right to vote. At a cemetery in Rochester, N.Y., people waited in long lines to pay their respects, plastering Ms. Anthony’s tombstone with “I voted” stickers.

Mr. Trump also will leave his own stamp on political history. He mobilized millions of voters with a blunt challenge to the status quo and gave voice to the economic and political grievances of a struggling American middle class.

Those are sentiments that have been brewing for years. But they emerged with surprising force behind Mr. Trump, who was dismissed as a TV celebrity when he first announced what seemed a quixotic candidacy.

Spokesmen for the Trump campaign and the Republican National Committee on a call with reporters Tuesday said they were feeling good about the party’s chances in the final hours of the election.

They touted the number of organizers they fielded Tuesday—about 7,600, compared with 876 organizers who worked Election Day for Republican nominee Mitt Romney’s campaign in 2012.

“We have a greater capacity for get-out-the-vote than any prior Republican effort,” said Chris Young, the RNC’s field director.

Mr. Trump often complained of the political system being rigged, making unproven allegations during appearances that took a toll on voter confidence. Civil-rights groups and some conservative activists fanned out to polling locations on Tuesday to monitor voting. A coalition of groups also operated a national hotline to field voter questions and concerns.

No major voting issues were reported, beyond the usual long lines, late precinct openings and some machine breakdowns.

Jason Reid, 26 years old, also of Waukesha, said divisions in his family over the election run deep. He voted for Mrs. Clinton. His mother voted for Mr. Trump.

“She told me she wasn’t voting,” he said, “and then she sneaked out and secretly voted for Trump.”

Write to Janet Hook at janet.hook@wsj.com, Colleen McCain Nelson at colleen.nelson@wsj.com and Beth Reinhard at beth.reinhard@wsj.com

Copyright ©2021 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8
Appeared in the November 9, 2016, print edition as '.'
